>> I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill,
and I want to welcome you
to "Living in Balance."
In our cultural series, we
have talked to many people
from many different
walks of life.
And today we will meet a man
who walks the medicine path.
He is Irish, and he is Cherokee,
and he is a storyteller.
And you will enjoy
this adventure today
with Soaring Eagle.
Come join us.
[THEME MUSIC]
For years, there
is a man who has
come into Southwest Florida.
And when he does, he
always shares with us.
But this is the first
time you, as the audience,
are going to get to
meet Soaring Eagle.
As I said, he is a storyteller.
He is a man who walks
the medicine path.
He is Irish and he is Cherokee.
And we are very pleased
to have him with us today.
So, welcome.
>> Thanks, Georgia.
I'm glad to be back.
But, as usual, I
have to give thanks
to the rest of the people that
live in the state of Florida,
especially the Native American
people and the Miccosukee
and the Seminole.
And I just want to let them know
that I'm honored to be here.
And they let me
do what I do here.
So because it's our land, so
I'd like to pay tribute to them.
>> Yes.
And that's a tradition that
you have done every program
that we have shared together.
Because it's honoring
the people, because you
are in their territory.
>> That's true.
>> And in the Native American,
we still have all those
territories of all
the different tribes.
>> That's right.
>> Yes.
>> So it's very important.
Because in this day and
time, especially, there's
so much road rage, and this,
and that, and the other,
that it's really nice for
people to show honor and give
thanks to other people for
being able to be in their area.
>> Well, you are
a traditional man.
Because you have been
trained, and as I said,
you walk the medicine path.
And your heritage is it your
grandfather, who is Cherokee,
taught you the old ways.
>> That's true.
I try to carry on--
it's my responsibility
to carry on the culture
and the medicines,
also, that he taught
me about, and the trees
and the plants and the
things we use for medicine.
So I try very hard
to keep up with that,
and carry it on, and
teach it to others, also,
so that it doesn't die.
>> Yes.
And later in the
show we're going
to meet your female apprentice.
>> Right.
>> Yes.
You have someone you know is
in training, and that you are--
>> Yeah.
I'm really proud.
>> Yes.
So in our second segment,
we'll meet Patty.
>> Yes.
That'll be great.
>> And you and your wife travel.
And part of this journey that
you're on takes you to powwows.
>> Right.
>> And those are celebrations.
>> And they're social.
>> Right.
>> But they're always
sacred moments.
>> This is true.
A lot of people don't know
that the songs that are
sang and the dances are danced,
for the most part, a good 80%
to 90% of them are
a form of prayer,
giving thanks to the creator
or god or grandfather
for the Earth, for Mother Earth,
and the plants, and the trees,
and for safe journey, and
for the food they eat,
and just many different things.
For a lot of the people,
it's a traditional time, too,
and a gathering of the people.
>> Yes.
>> Renewal of old friends
and making new friends,
and so forth, and
sharing the food.
And it's really a nice time.
Not only that, it
gives us a chance
to make all of our things,
our rattles and our war clubs
and our fans and
different things,
and share with other people
about some of the things
that we make.
>> Well, you have brought
some of the beautiful gifts.
And it's you and your
wife who travel together.
And these are some of
the things that you make.
And this one is--
you just told me about what
this is about, and what--
the parts to it.
Tell us about this.
What is it?
What do I have in
front of me, here?
>> This is a deer antler that
we've used for the handle.
This happens to be a
piece of wolf, here.
And these are turkey feathers.
For the most part,
the turkey was
a sacred bird for our people.
Because it was always
there for food.
So not just eagle feathers, and
hawk, and so forth are sacred,
so is the turkey feathers
for the Cherokee people.
So I try to use the proper
materials in the things,
also, as long as they're
legal for people to use.
But we use these--
I make these single ones
for people to smudge with.
Because we use the sage and
the sage bowl for purification
and we burn it.
And it's to fan the smoke
onto the people or items,
and get rid of negativity.
>> And the smudging is very
important because that is
a sacred ritual.
>> Yes, it is.
>> And it's very effective
as far as, as you said,
removing the negativities.
In fact, I just had a friend who
said that she was so pleased.
The man with whom she is
involved had a restaurant.
And they said that
the restaurants before
had not done well.
And so, because he was
open to it, they came in
and they did a smudging ceremony
before the restaurant opened.
And he has done very well.
[LAUGHS]
>> Well, I believe that because
we do it with our things.
Once we put our
things out, we smudge.
If somebody walks by that
I have a feeling that--
I feel that they are negative
person, I do it again.
Because people don't realize
that we carry an energy
that can go from you to me.
It can get off a
person that's negative
and get on your things.
And other people that
feel those energies
will walk around your place
where you have your things.
So it's necessary to cleanse it.
>> Well, you know, it's
an interesting thing.
Because the Native
Americans- this
is what I love about
all their cultures.
The aura is how it is
described in English.
And then your shakti,
which is my name,
is like, the vibration
that you give off.
So with a Native
American, they're
just very much aware of it.
And some people are
just more in tune.
>> Right.
Well, that's what
many of us are trying
to do is try very hard to raise
people's awareness about things
around them.
I know even in the military,
that some of the men
chose to follow me.
And I was in special forces,
and around the world nine times
in nine years.
And we smell, and
taste, and hear,
and feel a lot of things
that other people don't.
Not because they can't, but
because they don't practice it.
Because the creator
or god made us all so
we can do these things.
>> And I've said before,
too, one of the best parts
of the powwow, which I
really do appreciate,
is how they always
honor the warriors,
which are warriors today are
people from the military who
have served.
>> Right.
>> And it's really
a nice tradition.
And a lot of the Native
Americans have served.
>> Right.
Well, it's very
important for veterans
that are Native American.
Because when we have a
powwow, we have what's
called a grand entry.
And when the drums
are playing and they
have honor songs for
veterans, and so forth,
the veterans themselves--
the Native American veterans
carry the colors in.
And it's very important.
They go before everybody,
and then the head man
dancer, and head woman
dancer, and then elders,
and so forth and so on.
But all the veterans
go first and they
carry the flags and the
colors and post them.
And it's very important.
And, in fact, we
have a song that's
equal to our flag song that's
very important for us to do.
So we do the flag song.
And then, when we
leave the circle,
we do the honoring song.
And all the veterans
and anybody else
that's not-- don't even have
regalia on that's a veteran,
can follow them out and
get in and dance with them.
So it's honoring the warriors
and the veterans of all people,
whether Native American or not.
So it's very important
to us at the powwows.
>> One of the beautiful gifts
that you've made here, too,
this is a warrior's--
the hammer.
What is that?
>> Oh, the war club.
>> The war club.
That's it.
>> You can call it a
hammer, if you want to.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> This stone come from
the creek that runs through
the reservation up in
Cherokee, North Carolina.
And, by the way,
don't go picking up
those stones in there
unless you do have a card,
and you're Native American.
Because they'll come
and get you for it.
[LAUGHTER]
And the handle is wood, and
it's split soaked and water,
and then wrapped while you
can bend it around the stone.
But there's no glue in it.
And it's very sturdy.
And then we wrap the
hand with leather.
It's funny.
I had a talking stick, and
I was explaining to a lady
how this worked.
And she just got off
the plane from England
at the Miccosukee village.
And she said, well, my
husband would get that.
And I would never get it back.
And I said, that's the
reason you need a war club,
so you can get your
talking stick back.
>> To go with the talking stick.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> And I love the tradition
of the talking stick.
And we've adapted that in my
life because it seems to work.
And that's where
everybody takes a turn.
>> Right.
>> And you pass, as the
walking stick goes around--
the talking stick goes around.
>> I sold all my talking sticks.
And this is actually a pie.
But, you know, anything that
can be used as a talking
stick-- because our
people, they used
a talking stick whenever
they gather together
to make decisions.
And they can make
decisions because they
wasn't interrupted.
Because if you interrupted
and spoke out of turn
and didn't have
the talking stick,
a couple of large warriors
would come and lead you out
very quietly.
And you wasn't allowed
to come back and be
a part of the decision
making until the elders felt
like that you had
learned patience.
>> Yes.
>> So it's very important.
Nobody speaks unless they're
holding the talking stick.
And you say what you've
got to say and pass it
on to the next person.
>> One of the things
I wanted to do is,
because you do a
lot of healing work,
there are two recipes
that I have taken--
I took an herb class that was
given by one of our herbalists
in Southwest Florida.
But two, three sheets
of the materials
were Soaring Eagle's recipes.
So we have two recipes
from you that we're
going to share with the people.
>> Good.
>> One of them is
your health tonic.
And this is just an
overall, good for everybody,
but you said especially
good for high blood pressure
and for people who
are not feeling well.
It's just good cleansing.
And that's one with
apple cider vinegar.
>> Yeah.
That's for arthritis, too.
>> Arthritis?
OK.
>> And blood pressure.
I didn't realize it done so
good with the blood pressure
until I gave a lady the
recipe and she took it
and her husband
started taking it.
And come to find out, he
had high blood pressure.
And when he went in, his blood
pressure was all the way down.
He didn't even have to take
his medication anymore.
>> Now, one of the other things,
too, is one of your recipes.
It's easy, and I like it, and
it's kind of old fashioned.
But it's the cough syrup.
>> Yes.
>> It's simple.
>> Yeah, it's real simple.
But you use the lemons.
You can use any number
of lemons you want.
But I usually use two lemons.
And I slice them very
thin and put them
in about two cups of water.
This can vary, too.
And you just kind of simmer
that until it kind of evaporates
to about half the liquid.
And then you mash up the
lemons, and strain it out.
And whatever liquid
you have there,
then you put an equal
amount of honey with it,
and it's very good.
And if you want to really
put a little bite to it,
you can put some ground
cayenne pepper in it.
And it's very healing, that is.
>> Yes, that is.
Isn't it?
>> But a lot of people
can't stand the heat.
>> Yeah.
But that does add a--
>> Oh, yes.
>> --little healing element.
>> Not only that, the cayenne
pepper is very high in vitamin
C, also.
>> Well, we're going
to take a break.
And when we come back,
we have lots more
to talk about-- a couple
of my favorite books that
give us a little background
information on the Cherokee.
And we will meet Patty.
>> Good.
>> So if you will stay tuned, we
will be right back with Soaring
Eagle.
[THEME MUSIC]
If you're just joining
us, we're talking
to a man who walks
the medicine path.
He is a healer in the tradition
of the storyteller, too.
And he is Irish and Cherokee.
And that is, Soaring Eagle.
And one of the gifts that
Soaring Eagle has shared
with people in the
Southeast here,
from Florida all the way up the
coast, is the Moon Ceremony.
And he has with
him, his apprentice.
And we're happy
to have Patty Hit.
So welcome to you.
It's nice to have
you with us, Patty.
>> Thank you for having me here.
>> [LAUGHS] And we're
going to do some drumming.
And we're going to talk
about this Moon Ceremony
because it's a very
special and sacred event.
And tell us a
little bit about it,
and then the role that
Patty has with it.
>> Well, the Moon Ceremony is
something that the Cherokee
people have held pretty
traditionally down through
the years.
But my grandfather
taught me how to do it.
And it's basically held between
the new moon and the full moon.
And we gather together and--
to give thanks to
the creator or god--
same god that everybody
else has, believe it or not,
for putting the moon up there.
Because it was used as a
guide to fish and hunt,
plant seeds, and do
many different things.
And it was a time to cleanse
and get rid of your negativity,
and instead of just
letting it stack up
like people do nowadays.
So every 28 days, we
get rid of whatever.
And the ashes from the fire was
gifted to me by my grandfather.
Our people used
to carry the fire.
They had a special woven
thing, double weaved basket,
which is typical of Cherokee,
with a cauldron in it.
And every time they would move
from one place to the other,
they'd take the fire and
put it in the cauldron
and carry it with them.
So that's how fire got to be
so old, because it was carried.
>> I have a couple
books that I love--
"The Cherokees
Past and Present,"
and I think we have a
couple shots of these.
And, also, "Voices
of the Ancestors."
And the people who like to do
some reading about the seven
clans and about the
traditions, a very simple book
is "The Cherokees
Past and Present."
And then we also have one
that really goes deeply
into all these traditions
that you're talking about.
And that's "Voices
of our Ancestors."
And you had mentioned,
these are quite good, too.
Yes.
>> The reason I'd like
to see that book--
because so many of the
things that I was taught
is reflected in this
book, and, after the fact
really, of my teaching.
But it's written
by Dhyani Ywahoo.
And all of the different
tribes, they had societies.
And Dhyani Ywahoo is a 27th
generation Ywahoo society.
>> Whoa.
[LAUGHS]
>> Evidently, her grandmother
has allowed her to do this.
>> To share.
>> She got permission from her
grandmother to share and put
this in the form of a book.
>> Great.
>> So that's an old society.
>> Now, Patty, you are
learning the traditions.
And you have become an
apprentice to Soaring Eagle.
>> Yup.
>> Tell me about dedicating
your life to that.
>> Well, I kind of got
here in a strange way,
but it's kind of like, I felt
like I was led to do this.
To me, following the
Native American path
has made the creator whole
and very active in my life,
that when I'm walking down
the road and I see a hawk,
it's not just a bird
anymore that looks pretty.
It's maybe the
messenger, that maybe I
need to think about
when I was just thinking
or pay attention
for a few minutes.
And maybe an answer
will be there.
And it just made everything
seem whole and lively.
And, therefore, it
was something that I
chose to follow, and to learn
more and to do more with,
and to work with the people.
>> Well, I first met you
in that class on herbs.
And so, at that
time, you were doing
some singing and some chanting.
Now, you brought the drum.
And tell me, did you
paint the drum or as--
>> Yes, I did.
>> Who's the artist?
Do you want to show that to us?
If we could-- maybe this camera?
Let's see.
Yeah.
That's excellent.
OK.
And so everything
here is symbolic.
>> Yeah.
>> And you have been named--
Running Water is
your Indian name.
A very powerful name,
you said, Soaring Eagle.
>> That's true.
>> Yeah.
So do you want to play the
drum for us a little bit?
>> Sure.
>> And tell us about
the drum and --
>> Well, the drum is
a very sacred thing.
This is a drum
that I made myself.
I sweat, and cried, and pulled,
and yanked, and let dry myself.
And it represents the
heartbeat of Mother Earth.
It represents the heartbeat
that we all feel when
or we're in our mother's wombs.
And so, right now
with all the things
that are going on
in the world, I
wanted to sing a song about
being gentle with ourselves.
>> Oh, OK.
>> Because a lot of
times, we forget that.
We forget to love
ourselves, be gentle,
and then we forget
that we really
are part of the
great circle of life.
>> Well, thank you.
>> So I'm going to sing
a little song here.
>> Good.
[DRUM BEATING]
>> (SINGING) I will
be gentle with myself.
I will love myself.
I am a child of the universe.
We are one together.
I will be gentle with myself.
I will love myself.
I am a child of the universe.
We are one together.
Hee.
>> Thank you.
Now, you have been
doing the Moon Ceremony.
But, because you
travel so much, you've
given some
responsibilities, then,
to Patty when you are away.
And it is-- there's
so much ritual to it,
there's a lot to learn.
Like you said, the ashes came.
And so then you always carry
the ashes to the other,
and so forth.
But there's the corn, and so
there's a whole ritual to it.
But everything's symbolic.
>> Right.
When the people come there--
see, we have 28 days in a
moon, 28 days and a moon,
13 times in one year.
So we really gather
together there
so people can get rid of their
negativity, and so forth.
So we do all the
saging, full body sages
to get rid of the negativity.
We hand out cornmeal, so
they can take that cornmeal
and it's used as a
tool or a vehicle
to instill all their negativity,
and all the harsh words
and things that's happened
to him in the past 28 days.
And we take that back up,
and we take it to the fire
and get rid of it in the fire.
So it's a physical thing
we do with these hurts,
and so forth and so on.
And then we do the prayers.
And we pray to the same
god that everybody else,
even an organized
religion, prays to.
>> Well, one of the things that
they said about in the religion
and spirituality
of the Cherokee--
because they do believe
Great Spirit, the one god,
that it was very easy for
them to also incorporate
Christianity.
And you have a
legend that you've
shared with me before as
a storyteller, of someone
who walked the lands.
>> Well, you know, when the
first missionaries came over
here they started talking
to some of our elders.
And through drawing pictures
in the dirt and sign language
and a little of this
and a little of that,
they managed to communicate.
And, come to find
out, our elders
were telling them
stories that lined up
with stories in the Bible,
right down to the 23rd Psalms.
But we also feel like
that sometime between--
whenever we were
made and put here,
God gave us our
instructions to live by,
which we're equal to the
Ten Commandments, basically.
And so some time
between the crucifixion
and the Resurrection of Christ
or [CHEROKEE] in the Cherokee
language, we found out that
he walked the Americas,
and come around and said, my
father, when he created you,
gave you these
instructions to live by.
And you're drifting
away from them,
so you got to get back to it.
[LAUGHS] So get back with it.
>> So actually, yeah,
there is the legend, then,
that Jesus walked the
lands of the Cherokee.
>> Exactly.
Jesus walked the Americas.
>> Yeah.
>> He walked the Americas.
>> Now, you have
blended the worlds.
And, like you said,
you are registered.
You have your card and
you are a Cherokee.
But you really have
walked in both worlds.
But now it really
feels right to you
to really dedicate
all of your time to--
you do classes.
You go from center to
center, and you share
the herbs and the healing.
What is the message
that you're wanting
to share with people most?
>> I think what I want to share
most is awareness and survival.
I think those two words
pretty well cover everything.
Because we hear things, and we
feel things, and we see things,
and we smell things, we taste
things in the air that other
people don't.
And it's not because they can't.
It's just because they
don't stop to do it.
They don't practice it.
>> Like Patty with
the hawk, for example.
>> Well, it's true.
>> Paying attention to nature
and things around you--
>> That's true.
That's a good
example of the hawk.
Patty don't see a bird
anymore as just a pretty bird.
There's a message in that.
There's a message and
things that happen.
I know when South America had
an earthquake here a while back,
the first one they had, and
I had terrible headaches.
And I even had a dream
about it two days
before it ever happened.
There's many things that happens
that way, that you just--
you really can't explain it.
And so many people
in society today,
with science and
everything, everything's
got to be scientific.
If you can't see it or feel
it or taste it or smell it,
it's not--
it doesn't exist.
That isn't true.
>> Well, you know, it's
really fascinating.
And I'm so glad we have so
many things that you've shared.
And people can be in touch
with you because you have tapes
and you have videos.
So, as I said, you
are the modern man
who walks the medicine path.
And, Patty, it was really
wonderful to have you with us.
>> Thank you.
>> If you would like to be
in touch with Soaring Eagle,
stay tuned.
And we'll let you
know how you can.
And, also, we would
love to hear from you.
[THEME MUSIC]
I love it when
Soaring Eagle comes.
The time just flies by.
He has many stories to tell.
But his heart is so good, and he
has such a wonderful intention
to share the wisdom
and the light
of his people, the Cherokee.
And we are so pleased that
Patty was with us, also.
And I am always pleased
that you are there.
Until next time, may you be
well, happy and peaceful.
I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill.
[THEME MUSIC]